README.md, before:

# lean-regex

A formally verified regular expression engine for the Lean programming language.

## Overview

lean-regex provides a robust, formally verified implementation of regular expressions for Lean 4. The library implements two distinct matching algorithms (a backtracker and a virtual machine), both with complete mathematical proofs of their correctness.

### Key Features

- **Formally Verified**: Both matching algorithms (backtracker and VM) are mathematically proven to correctly implement the semantics of regular expressions
- **Real-World Regex Features**: Support for capture groups, character classes, substring matching, and more
- **Two Matching Engines**: Choose between a backtracker or virtual machine implementation, both provably correct
- **Simple API**: Clean, easy-to-use interface for common regex operations

## Installation

Add lean-regex to your Lean project by adding the following to your `lakefile.toml`:

```toml
[[require]]
name = "Regex"
git = "https://github.com/pandaman64/lean-regex"
rev = "v4.20.0"
subDir = "regex"
```

or

```lean
require Regex from git "https://github.com/pandaman64/lean-regex.git" @ "v4.20.0" / "regex"
```

to your `lakefile.lean`.

## Usage

```lean
import Regex

-- Create a regex at compile-time using re! syntax
def dateRegexExample := re! r"\d{4}-\d{2}-\d{2}"

-- Find and return matches (and their positions as components of each `Substring`)
def allMatches := dateRegexExample.findAll
  "2025-05-24: Something happened\\n2025-05-26: Another thing happened"

-- #["2025-05-24".toSubstring, "2025-05-26".toSubstring]
#eval allMatches

-- #[{ byteIdx := 0 }, { byteIdx := 32 }]
#eval allMatches.map (·.startPos)

-- Capture groups
def groupRegexExample := re! r"(a+)(b*)"

def captures := groupRegexExample.capture "aaabb"

/-
Returns captured groups: group 0 = whole match, group 1 = "aaa", group 2 = "bb":

some {
  haystack := "aaabb",
  buffer := #[
    some { byteIdx := 0 }, some { byteIdx := 5 },
    some { byteIdx := 0 }, some { byteIdx := 3 },
    some { byteIdx := 3 }, some { byteIdx := 5 }
  ]
}
-/
#eval captures
```

For more details, please check [the API reference](https://pandaman64.github.io/lean-regex/Regex.html).

## Formal Verification

The library's correctness is formally verified through mathematical proofs in Lean 4. This ensures that:

1. **Soundness**: When the engine reports a match, it correctly follows the formal semantics of regular expressions
2. **Completeness**: When the engine reports no match, there truly is no match according to the formal semantics
3. **Capture Correctness**: Capture groups correctly identify the matched substrings

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please start by creating an issue to discuss your proposed changes before submitting a Pull Request.

## License

This project is licensed under the Apache License 2.0.

Commit message:

Add scope of formal verification

README.md, after:

# lean-regex

A formally verified regular expression engine for the Lean programming language.

## Overview

lean-regex provides a robust, formally verified implementation of regular expressions for Lean 4. The library implements two distinct matching algorithms (a backtracker and a virtual machine), both with complete mathematical proofs of their correctness.

### Key Features

- **Formally Verified**: Both matching algorithms (backtracker and VM) are mathematically proven to correctly implement the semantics of regular expressions
- **Real-World Regex Features**: Support for capture groups, character classes, substring matching, and more
- **Two Matching Engines**: Choose between a backtracker or virtual machine implementation, both provably correct
- **Simple API**: Clean, easy-to-use interface for common regex operations

## Installation

Add lean-regex to your Lean project by adding the following to your `lakefile.toml`:

```toml
[[require]]
name = "Regex"
git = "https://github.com/pandaman64/lean-regex"
rev = "v4.20.0"
subDir = "regex"
```

or

```lean
require Regex from git "https://github.com/pandaman64/lean-regex.git" @ "v4.20.0" / "regex"
```

to your `lakefile.lean`.

## Usage

```lean
import Regex

-- Create a regex at compile-time using re! syntax
def dateRegexExample := re! r"\d{4}-\d{2}-\d{2}"

-- Find and return matches (and their positions as components of each `Substring`)
def allMatches := dateRegexExample.findAll
  "2025-05-24: Something happened\\n2025-05-26: Another thing happened"

-- #["2025-05-24".toSubstring, "2025-05-26".toSubstring]
#eval allMatches

-- #[{ byteIdx := 0 }, { byteIdx := 32 }]
#eval allMatches.map (·.startPos)

-- Capture groups
def groupRegexExample := re! r"(a+)(b*)"

def captures := groupRegexExample.capture "aaabb"

/-
Returns captured groups: group 0 = whole match, group 1 = "aaa", group 2 = "bb":

some {
  haystack := "aaabb",
  buffer := #[
    some { byteIdx := 0 }, some { byteIdx := 5 },
    some { byteIdx := 0 }, some { byteIdx := 3 },
    some { byteIdx := 3 }, some { byteIdx := 5 }
  ]
}
-/
#eval captures
```

For more details, please check [the API reference](https://pandaman64.github.io/lean-regex/Regex.html).

## Formal Verification

The library's correctness is formally verified through mathematical proofs in Lean 4. This ensures that:

1. **Soundness**: When the engine reports a match, it correctly follows the formal semantics of regular expressions
2. **Completeness**: When the engine reports no match, there truly is no match according to the formal semantics
3. **Capture Correctness**: Capture groups correctly identify the matched substrings

### Scope of Formal Verification

The formal proofs provide strong guarantees about the correctness of our regular expression engines. However, it is important to understand what these proofs cover and what they do not:

1. **Correctness is Relative to the Specification.** Our proofs guarantee that the implementation correctly adheres to our formal specification of regular expression semantics, as defined in [Expr/
Semantics/Captures.lean](https://github.com/pandaman64/lean-regex/blob/main/correctness/RegexCorrectness/Data/Expr/Semantics/Captures.lean). If our specification differs from expected behavior, our proofs would not detect this
2. **Scope of Proven Properties.** We have focused on core matching properties such as the soundness and completeness. Not every function has been verified against every desirable property
3. **Stack Safety.** While the core search logic is stack-safe, some preprocessing components (parsers and NFA compilers) use non-tail recursion. For exceptionally complex regular expressions, this could lead to stack overflow. If you encounter this, please report it as an issue

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please start by creating an issue to discuss your proposed changes before submitting a Pull Request.

## License

This project is licensed under the Apache License 2.0.
